# soccermatchpredictor introduction rough draft

## Team members: Anna, Elshiekh, Alan, Yotam

## Introduction

If you follow soccer or any sport for that matter, religiously, you’ll quickly realize that the outcomes are as unpredictable as guessing lottery numbers. Furthermore, accurately predicting the outcome of soccer matches is difficult. Last year, 1.5 billion people watched the world cup, making soccer the most popular sport in the world. Fans around the world try to predict the outcome of soccer matches for fun or even to make money through sports betting. As such, it is important to create a machine-learning model that can accurately predict the outcome of soccer matches. 

You can always have a good idea of who might win based on team strength, but even that cannot be trusted at times due to the many other factors that come into play: inconsistency of players, unpredictable events during and surrounding a match, the dynamic nature of team performance and luck. Traditional statistical models lack the capability to incorporate various factors and rely heavily on past performance without considering current conditions. Furthermore, bias and limited capacity to analyze multiple factors in real-time add to the difficulty. Machine Learning has the potential to build relationships across many factors and potentially improve some of these difficulties.

Using an artificial neural network, we will use various factors such as player statistics, team dynamics, and performance in previous matches for our prediction. The integration of diverse data sources and the use of advanced machine learning algorithms will help overcome the limitations of prior work. The dataset used contains information about European soccer teams from 2008 to 2016.

In our results, we expect to see significant improvement in prediction accuracy compared to traditional statistical models and human intuition. We test our results by comparing our model’s predictions against actual match outcomes and against other prediction systems. In our future work, we would like to make regular updates to our model to keep it current with new information and features as well as potential advancements in machine learning techniques. 

## Related Works

There is a variety of studies that use neural networks to predict the outcomes of soccer matches. One such study is "Predicting Soccer Match Results in the English Premier League" by Ben Ulmer. The study aimed to predict the results of soccer matches in the English Premier League using machine learning models. The authors faced challenges such as the randomness of soccer data and the lack of injury information for players. Features such as whether a team is a home or away, team Elo rankings, and recent results were used for feature selection. The authors also tested various models including a stochastic gradient descent algorithm, Naive Bayes, a hidden Markov model, and a Support Vector Machine (SVM) with an RBF kernel. They managed to achieve about 50% accuracy when predicting whether the match was a win loss or a tie. The authors suggested that more advanced methods of feature selection and data preprocessing may improve the accuracy of the predictions. A study that uses more advanced methods is “Predicting Wins, Losses and Attributes’ Sensitivities in the Soccer World Cup 2018 Using Neural Network Analysis” by Amr Hassan et. al. This paper analyzes data from the 2018 World Cup to create a model for predicting match results using supervised learning. The model is based on the “Radial basis function using 75 attributes”. The authors were able to achieve a win rate of 83.3% and a loss rate of 72.7% using key attributes such as Total Team Medium Pass Attempted (MBA) and the Distance Covered Team Average in zone 3. Additionally, the study “A Comparative Study on Neural Network Based Soccer Result Prediction” by Burak Galip Aslan and Mustafa Murat Inceoglu uses the black-box approach to achieve better prediction results. Traditional methods of predicting soccer matches rely on statistical models, however, the black box approach has proven to be better. The authors of the paper compared different models, including one by Cheng et. al. that uses a hybrid neural network, and their black box method was significantly better than the other methods. One thing the paper highlights is the importance of input data. More specifically, they note ‘The available data should be transformed into alternative formats… It may not be necessary to apply any available data in the form of input parameters’ (Aslan and Inceoglu). With this method, the authors of the paper were able to achieve correct home win predictions 70-80% of the time.



